Welcome to the 64-bit Overview session.
My name is Ali Ozer.
I'm the manager of the
Cocoa Frameworks team.
I've also been coordinating the 64-bit
effort across Leopard for the past year,
and that's why I'm speaking to you today.
Okay, so today's talk,
we're first going to
cover what 64-bit is,
then we're going to look
at the 64-bit landscape,
we're going to talk about
what 64-bit means to you,
then we're going to talk a bit about
the porting and pitfalls that you
might encounter during the porting,
and have some closing
thoughts at the end.
So what is 64-bit?
64-bit is support for
64-bit address space.
That's the most basic definition.
32-bit can support 4 gigabytes,
which is about 4 billion bytes of course,
while 64-bit extends that to 16 exabytes,
which is 16 billion billion bytes,
or 16 quintillion.
Now,
the important thing about 64-bit support
is that it's concurrent use of 64-bit.
There are already some 32-bit
applications out there,
such as iMovie, Final Cut Pro,
database programs,
etc., that let you manage
more than 4 gigabytes of data.
However,
the way they do that is by loading
those files into memory in chunks,
and they sort of do their
own paging if needed,
and they never load more than 4
gigabytes into memory at once.
With 64-bit support,
you get concurrent access to potentially
64-bit's worth of address space.
Now let me give you sort of
a scale of what 64-bit means.
Now 4 billion 32-bit is
a pretty large number.
If you started counting
to 4 billion today,
it would take you about
200 years to get there.
On the other hand,
4 billion is not really
such a big number.
It is not enough to represent
the world population.
It's not big enough to represent the U.S.
debt.
It's not big enough to
even represent the U.S.
deficit.
It's not big enough to
represent Bill Gates's fortune.
On good days,
it's not enough to represent
Steve Jobs's fortune.
And it's not enough to represent the
number of pages indexed by Google or the
number of hamburgers sold by McDonald's.
So really, 32-bit is very inadequate,
in fact, for many purposes.
On the other hand, 64-bit is huge.
If you started counting
to 16 quintillion,
and let's say you started
the day the universe started,
which was about 14 billion years ago,
you'd only be about 1.5%
of the way there today.
So it's a pretty big number.
Okay, so let's talk about the
data type changes in 64-bit.
Since it's a 64-bit address space,
and since you have concurrent
access to this address space,
pointers go from 32 to 64 bits.
In addition, the long data type goes
from 32 to 64 bits,
and all other data types remain the same.
And that's why this is referred
to as the LP64 model - longs
and pointers go to 64-bit.
Now the interesting thing about
the LP64 model is it is the
model that other Unixes use,
so therefore it is compatible
with a lot of open source software
that you will find out there,
which of course is a good thing.
And here is a chart of
the data type changes.
In ILP32, which is where we are today,
integers, longs, and pointers are 32-bit.
These are the data types.
And in the LP64 world,
they all remain the same size,
except long goes to 8 bytes and
pointer goes to 8 bytes as well.
Now one interesting thing to note
here is I said other Unixes are LP64,
but Windows in the 64-bit world is LLP64.
What that means is Windows programs under
64-bit have longs which are 32-bits,
but long longs which are 64-bits.
So if you have part of your source
space which is cross-platform that
needs to go in Windows as well,
that's something to keep in mind.
You might want to avoid the
long data type in those cases.
So given that a pointer is 64-bit,
that sort of implies that the
process is either 32-bit or 64-bit,
but it cannot be both.
There is no notion of mixed mode
where a 64-bit process can load
32-bit plugins or libraries.
So this means all libraries, frameworks,
plugins needed for your application
have to be 64-bit for your
application to run as 64-bit.
So here's the way the world looked
about a year and a half ago.
It was nice and simple.
We had PowerPC, text-edit, 32-bit,
and it in turn depended
on a 32-bit PowerPC,
Cocoa, and that depended on
application services,
core services, lib system,
down what we refer to
as the framework stack.
And everything was 32-bit PowerPC,
and that's all we had.
Now with 64-bit,
you basically have another
parallel stack of frameworks.
And the 64-bit text-edit,
to run a 64-bit text-edit,
you need a 64-bit Cocoa,
which needs application services,
core services, lib system, etc.
And this is very similar really to
the way we did the Intel transition
when we introduced it a year ago.
32-bit Intel text-edit
requires a 32-bit Intel Cocoa,
and so on down the stack.
They all have to be built
for that architecture.
And of course, yesterday we introduced
64-bit Intel as well,
and that's also yet another stack.
Now of course,
the interesting thing to know
that is although these are
all separate architectures,
they are all bundled together in
the universal packaging format.
So it is actually one binary that
contains four separate architectures.
Now, so let me give you a
perspective on what we're doing.
The 64-bit effort requires
that all libraries,
frameworks, etc.
be available as 64-bit.
In that way, it's sort of similar to the
widening of the Panama Canal.
Panama Canal used to be,
when it was first built,
it was wide enough for most ships,
or all ships of today,
but these days it no longer is
wide enough for the large super
tankers or the larger cargo ships.
And there is an effort, or a desire,
to get the Panama Canal widened.
Now one interesting thing about this
effort is that it's not an effort
you can do 95%. Because if you did,
this is what it would look like.
And that big ship would get through
most of the canal and still get stuck.
So really, the effort,
doing something like the Panama Canal,
requires that you do
the job 100%. Similarly,
if you're an application
that wants to run a 64-bit,
you need to make sure everything you
depend on is available to you as 64-bit.
If only 95% of the things are available,
your application will not be able to run.
So, and that's, you know,
that's what you need.
So that's, you know,
that's sort of a cheerful realization.
So let's think about why we're doing,
why we're doing all this,
why we're going to all this effort.
Why 64-bit?
Now one reason is developers.
There are certain developers,
certain applications where you're
already running into limits of
32-bit and telling us about it.
You have applications that really
are pushing the limits of 32-bit
and you know you need 64-bit to
get those applications running.
Similarly,
users are also telling us the same thing.
They hear from developers that there
are certain applications which really
need more than 32-bit to be effective.
Another reason for doing
64-bit is competition.
Microsoft already has 64-bit
version of Windows XP out,
and there is 64-bit version
of Vista on the horizon.
So this is something which again
developers and users point to
as something that they need
to have on Mac OS X as well.
Hardware is another very
important reason for doing 64-bit.
We already have 64-bit
capable hardware out there.
64-bit chips are available,
and on this hardware,
like especially Intel 64,
there is more registers
available in 64-bit,
there are wider registers,
there is the instruction
relative addressing mode,
which actually helps out.
So therefore, there are some hardware
benefits to running in 64-bit.
Not to mention the fact that you
can put up to 8 or 16 gigabytes
of memory into these machines.
So really having an application
which can access just the piddly 4
gigabytes on your 16-gigabyte hardware,
that seems pretty limiting.
So today's hardware is
already pushing the limits,
so the software has to
catch up in some way.
[Transcript missing]
So let's look at the 64-bit landscape.
Let's look at where we are and
where others are in 64-bit.
Now in Tiger,
only libsystem and accelerated
frameworks are available,
and it's only C and C++.
We don't have support for Objective-C,
and we don't have support
for Java in Tiger.
So what this means is in
Tiger you don't have Carbon,
you don't have Cocoa,
you don't have Quartz,
you don't have core services,
you don't have core foundation.
So a lot of the user interface
level functionality is missing.
So this is useful for command line tools,
but really no GUI applications.
And we recommend that to
create a GUI application
you create a 64-bit backend,
and you create a 32-bit frontend,
and you basically communicate using IPC.
And that's what Mathematica,
for instance, has done.
That's how Mathematica
works in the 64-bit mode.
It's got a 32-bit frontend
with a 64-bit backend.
Now in Leopard, of course,
we're enabling any Cocoa or
Carbon application to run as 64-bit.
And this also includes Java.
However, we're making Java available
only for Intel 64-bit.
Now let me talk about what
Microsoft has done with Windows.
Its 64-bit version of Windows XP,
which is known as XP x64,
was released more than a year ago,
in April of last year.
And it's really marketed
at advanced users.
It's not something you can
go easily get at your local
Costco and install on your machine.
You have to jump through a few hoops.
But it's not been wildly successful,
and that's according to Microsoft.
One of the reasons for this is
there are compatibility issues.
64-bit Windows require 64-bit drivers,
which originally were
a very small number,
and since then there's
been new ones introduced.
16-bit DOS and Windows applications
are unsupported,
and also some 32-bit
applications don't work.
Because really, under 64-bit Windows,
32-bit applications are
running under this WOW64.
So,
it's a Windows on Windows 64 environment,
which Microsoft used
the term emulation for.
And, you know,
that's good enough for many, many apps,
but not all.
So some 32-bit applications
do not work under XP x64.
And this is a quote from Paul Thoreau
of Supersight for Windows,
a recent quote.
And you know, he said,
"XP-X64 is doomed to failure
because of hardware and software
incompatibilities." And truth is,
I don't think Microsoft really
also put a lot behind this product.
For Microsoft, their intent is to make
64-bit mainstream with Vista.
And that's where they're
really looking forward to,
it seems like.
In Vista,
64-bit is not a separate product.
However, it is still a separate DVD.
And I think that's the way
it's going to be shipping.
Most editions of Vista will
come with 64-bit version and
32-bit version in the box.
And at the time you install,
you choose which one you want to install.
So the user has to make a choice.
Am I installing 32 or 64?
And from what I understand,
it will have some of the same sort
of compatibility issues as XP-X64.
And of course,
also some benefits as well that
64-bit brings to the environment.
Now let's compare that to Leopard.
In Leopard, it's a single install.
You know, you buy your Mac OS ...and
you install Leopard.
And it's 64-bit capable,
assuming your hardware is 64-bit capable.
32-bit and 64-bit applications coexist.
That's because I showed you, you know,
each application runs
in its own framework.
It uses its own binary.
So there's no emulation or
anything like that going on here.
A 32-bit application runs
fully well on a 64-bit machine,
and so will a 64-bit application.
So it's full compatibility.
So the good thing here is that... ...the
user's choice for 64-bit is whether they
bought a 64-bit capable machine or not.
And, you know,
you as the developer decide
whether 64-bit is right for you.
But even when you ship a 32-bit app,
you know, there's not this danger that,
"Oh, because the user installed 64-bit,
my app won't run." So we believe,
you know, this gives you somewhat more
of a choice in choosing 64-bit.
So, okay, the OS has 64-bit.
What does this mean for you?
Okay, so there are a number of
considerations for moving to 64-bit.
And most of them are performance related,
because 64-bit is really touted
for performance most of the time.
Now, if your application needs
large address space,
the answer is a definite yes.
I mean,
this is the example we saw with the
DNA demo Simon showed yesterday.
Simon Patience showed it.
I don't know if you saw it,
but basically a 32-bit version took
many minutes to go through the frames,
because it had to load a 4-gigabyte
file in chunks and process it,
while the 64-bit version could
load the whole 4-gigabyte file
and just run through it and
generate a frame every second.
I mean, there are the orders of magnitude
faster for the 64-bit case.
And there are many
applications like this,
so if you have one of those applications,
the answer is yes.
64-bit is definitely for you.
Now, how about others?
So there are a few other
performance considerations.
One is that when you're
running in 64-bit mode,
your pointers are larger,
some of your data types are larger,
so you're going to be
using a little more memory.
But you know,
it's probably not that much more.
In reality, most of the memory used by
applications tend to be in
window backing stores and images,
which don't change size.
So this additional memory
impact isn't that bad.
On the other hand,
there's performance benefits.
As I mentioned earlier,
there are hardware benefits
to running in 64-bit.
On Intel, you get more registers,
there are wider registers,
you get addressing mode.
So with those, compute-bound,
CPU-bound applications can actually get
a good boost from running in 64-bit.
So if your application is very
much compute-bound and you're
really interested in getting every
percentage of CPU out of the machine,
64-bit might be interesting
for you as well,
although you might not
be handling lots of data.
One other consideration is the overall
memory impact of 64-bit to the system.
Now let's look at the earlier
framework stack we had.
You have the stack of 32-bit frameworks.
Now when you run 32-bit text edit,
it pulls in the 32-bit
stack of frameworks.
When you go ahead and run another
32-bit application like Safari,
it also uses the same frameworks.
Of course, it might use some other
frameworks as well,
but the basic system
ones are the same ones.
So 32-bit mail and 32-bit iChat and
all other 32-bit applications all
use the same stack of frameworks.
Now let's assume you ran 64-bit chess.
And by the way, chess on your system is
actually 64-bit today.
Of course, it's also 32-bit and that's
why it runs on your laptops,
but if you run it on a 64-bit machine,
it will run as a 64-bit application.
So when you run 64-bit chess,
it pulls in the 64-bit architectures
from each one of those frameworks.
So clearly, there is a little bit of an
additional memory over time.
So there is an additional
memory overhead here.
And so therefore,
64-bit in a very low memory machine
will cause some memory pressure.
So that's yet another
consideration to keep in mind.
So with those in mind,
our answer is that in Leopard,
if your application is not
going to benefit from 64-bit,
it's probably not a good
idea to move to 64-bit.
However, post-Leopard,
the answer changes.
And we believe the answer is, yeah,
likely someday.
We don't believe that 64-bit is going
to remain a niche for specialized
applications going forward.
At some point, we believe,
most applications will
probably become 64-bit.
It's almost like today,
you do not see 16-bit
applications anywhere,
really.
They're really part of the history,
because the systems are optimized
for running 32-bit applications.
And that's probably going to be the case.
Five, ten years from now,
do you want to be the only 32-bit app
in a block of 64-bit applications?
That might be the scenario.
Now we don't have a crystal ball,
we don't know what date this is, so on,
so it's hard to tell,
but we believe this is the case.
Now, if you have a framework, a library,
or a plugin, and especially if you
have a public framework,
or a public library, public plugin,
like a plugin that goes into, say,
WebKit or some other plugin mechanism,
we really do want you to move
to 64-bit as soon as possible,
because by making your product,
your framework, library, or plugin,
available as 64-bit,
you'll be enabling others who might be
thinking of moving to 64-bit themselves.
So, just like we're making the system
libraries available as 64-bit,
we'd ask you to consider
doing the same thing as well.
Now let's talk about
levels of 64-bitness.
This is like the levels you attain as
you go through the conversion process.
The very first level
is the 64-bit wannabes.
And these are who can build
their applications as 64-bit.
What this means is you
open up your project,
you check that checkbox,
and you deal with the
warnings and the errors,
and eventually your
project builds as 64-bit.
Congratulations,
you're now a 64-bit wannabe.
Of course,
that's not where you really wanna be.
The next level is the 64-bit novice.
And that's when you can actually
run your application as 64-bit,
which might require some debugging.
Now, believe me,
it's a real thrill to have your
application come up as 64-bit.
It's probably the same as the
thrill you get when you ran it,
and you hopefully did,
as running your application on Intel.
You have just conquered
a brand new architecture.
Congratulations.
But again,
novice is not where you wanna be either.
You wanna go to a few
more levels above this.
There's a 64-bit apprentice.
Here, not only does your
application run under 64-bit,
it can run with addresses
above 4 gigabytes.
Now, why is this interesting?
One of the most common errors that
you'll see in 64-bit applications
is truncation of addresses,
where somebody will take an address,
put it into a 32-bit quantity,
and then extract it.
Now clearly if the address
is below 4 gigabytes,
that will work.
But once you start managing
addresses above 4 gigabytes,
that will start to truncate addresses
and causing your app to crash.
So therefore this might be a harder
level to attain than just novice.
Now the good news is
When you build your application for 10.5,
at least on Intel 64,
we build with certain options that
make your application run with
addresses above 4 GB out of the gate.
So therefore by the time
your application runs,
it's already an apprentice.
On PowerPC the situation is
a little more complicated,
and I think we'll go into it
in tomorrow's in-depth talk.
But again,
a 10.5 built app will have most
of the addresses above 4 GB.
And once you get your
application running,
it will be an apprentice.
But for instance,
if you had a Tiger-based
64-bit command line tool,
and you run it on Leopard,
it's not yet an apprentice because it
doesn't have these options enabled.
Now apprentice is not really
where you want to be either.
You really want to be the 64-bit master.
I mean, probably the important reason you
went to 64-bit is that you want
to handle large amounts of data.
And you've proven yourself a
master of 64-bit which can actually
manage more than 4 GB of data.
So why is this hard to achieve?
Well, maybe not hard,
but why might it involve difficulties?
I don't want to discourage anybody here.
Types like int, Sint32, uint32t,
et cetera, these are all 32 bits.
And they're 32 bits even
in a 64-bit environment.
If your application still uses these
types and uses APIs with those types,
you will only be managing
up to 4 GB of data.
So really to make your
application fully 64-bit capable,
you need to switch those ints to longs,
switch them to 64-bit capable types,
and where necessary,
move to APIs that enable
64-bit management of data.
And that will make you a master.
Now master isn't the end of this chain
either because there's one more level.
And that's when you get
to be 64-bit shippable.
And that is not only do you do all this,
you can run and you can run about 4 GB,
but you do it efficiently.
And the reason I mention this is
64-bit gives you the impression of,
oh yeah, it's performance nirvana.
You get there,
you got all the elbow room,
you can do whatever you want,
allocate memory, just throw it away,
who cares, a lot of memory.
And that's not true at all.
One thing to keep in mind is
not every user who has 64-bit
machine has 16 GB of memory,
for instance.
So really, even under 64-bit,
you have to stick to both the tried and
true performance techniques you have,
and in fact, some others as well,
as a way to make sure.
your application is as
efficient as possible.
So really,
we want you to design those supertankers
that can go through the Panama Canal,
but we want them to be very efficient,
0 to 60 in 4 seconds.
Okay, now there are some additional
framework considerations when
you're going through this.
So if you own a framework,
Now let's remind ourselves,
to be a master, you need to be able to
handle more than 4GB of data.
Now if you're a framework or a library,
meaning you have some
public API other people use,
there are two steps to attaining this.
And this is true for
the system APIs as well.
Step one is to make your
API handle 64-bit quantities.
And step two is to make your
implementation handle 64-bit quantities.
And you can do these at different times,
and let me talk about that.
Now as I mentioned earlier,
types such as INT, INT32, etc.
- these are not 64-bit capable.
So if you use these types in your APIs,
it cannot express 64-bit quantities.
Here's an example.
This is from Core Foundation.
Core Foundation has a
type called CFIndex.
And in Tiger,
this is declared to be Sint32,
which is clearly a 32-bit type.
And an API such as
CFArrayGetCount returns a CFIndex,
so therefore it's only capable
of managing 32-bit worth of data.
And since it's signed,
CFArrayGetCount cannot represent
more than 2 billion elements.
So how do you deal with this?
Well,
one solution is to use 64-bit types:
Long, SizeT, S-SizeT,
there's a number of them.
Another solution,
a separate path you can take,
is to update definitions
of existing type-defs.
Like CFIndex could be updated,
byte count could be updated, and so on.
And we've in fact done these
with some of these types.
And another solution is to just
add new type-defs and start
using them where appropriate.
And we've done this in some other cases.
For instance, we've introduced NSInteger,
PrefCon, and so on.
With that, our sample,
core foundation CFIndex,
now is declared to return a long,
and thus CFArrayGetCount is
now able to represent up to at
least 8 quintillion elements.
Not 16, but 8,
because of the sign in this.
Now, one thing that's important is,
as you do this,
you want to make sure that the
32-bit API remains compatible.
And here, after making this change,
one thing to notice is that CFIndex
is still declared to return a long.
And here, after making this change,
one thing to notice is that CFIndex
is still declared to return a long.
declared to be a 32-bit
quantity on 32 bits,
so therefore it is compatible
in the 32-bit world.
In fact, Sint32 used to be declared as
long in the 32-bit environment,
so therefore we have not changed anything
on the 32-bit platform after this change.
This is important, especially like us.
You're in a position of providing
binary compatibility release-to-release.
Okay, so now let me do a quick
case study of Cocoa.
In Cocoa we solved our problem of getting
to the master level by adding new types,
NSInteger and NSUInteger.
And as you might know,
Cocoa used ints and unsigned
ints in almost all of the API,
and we just replaced all of those
with NSInteger and NSUInteger.
And NSInteger and UInteger
are declared like this.
In LP64, which is how you denote 64-bit,
they're defined to be longs,
and in 32-bit they're defined to be ints.
And again, you know,
we have this definition because
we want to maintain that absolute
binary compatibility in 32-bit.
And with that,
we've changed the definition
of the NSRA methods,
for instance,
for count and objected index
to deal with NSU integers,
which means they're
now capable of 64-bit.
Now one thing you might be wondering
is why do this to all the APIs,
and the reason for that is consistency,
impedance match, and so on.
Across Cocoa APIs we want consistency,
so even though there are some APIs which
might not benefit from 64-bit,
just changing all of them introduces
or preserves that kind of consistency
that Cocoa is well known for.
So we want to continue that
consistency across API by just
using the same APIs throughout.
Another interesting case is Quartz.
In the Quartz case we
added the CG float type.
It's a float on 32-bit,
but it's a double on 64-bit.
This value is used for
graphical quantities,
coordinates, sizes, etc.
And using doubles gives us much bigger
range and much better precision.
We didn't do this
though for LP64 reasons.
In fact, LP64 doesn't dictate anything
about floating-point types.
There's no changes.
But the reason we did this is to take
advantage of this opportunity we have,
the binary incompatibility opportunity.
You know, everybody will be rebuilding
their applications,
so why not introduce this very
forward-looking change so we can
benefit from this in years to come?
So all Quartz and Quartz-based
APIs will now be using CG floats
to represent coordinates,
and they're doubles on 64-bit.
Here are some examples:
Move to Point takes two CG floats,
Set Font Size takes a CG float,
CG Color Create,
which used to take an array of floats,
now takes an array of CG floats.
OK,
so at this point you might be thinking,
you know, give me a break.
Can CFArray really manage
billions of values?
That doesn't sound realistic at all.
And the answer is, you know,
even if something doesn't handle
64 bits behind the scenes,
behind the API today, it might someday,
you know, someday it will probably do it.
And the important thing is to get
the API right today because we
cannot change APIs very easily.
Every time we change APIs,
we have to go through
a deprecation process.
We have to let you all know.
You all have to get off the old APIs.
It's a hassle for us, hassle for you,
hassle for our text pubs folks.
You know, it's a lot of work.
So it's important to get
the APIs right today.
The implementation can follow.
And one other thing to keep in
mind is that APIs like this,
which are capable of 64-bit,
can enable new approaches.
For instance, with a CFArray capable of
representing up to 64-bit services.
It's worth of elements.
You might even imagine
using sparse arrays.
So arrays which actually don't have,
you know,
billions and billions of elements in it,
but which have indexes in the
billions and billions of range
where the implementation is
smart enough to deal with that.
And that could enable you to do,
you know, different things in the future
using such a data structure.
Okay,
so let me talk about the porting process
and go through some of the pitfalls
you might encounter during this.
So porting to 64-bit could be as simple
as checking that checkbox and going,
and you know, you can try that.
If you're a command line type of person,
you can also compile with the
appropriate architectures.
You can go ahead and say, you know,
just compile your file with
-arch ppc64 or -arch x8664.
Or you can even do Xcode build
from the command line by specifying
arches with these architectures.
That's all pretty straightforward.
Now, some code conversion
will likely be needed.
64-bit is not necessarily
source compatible with 32-bit.
There are changes in some of the APIs,
some APIs are not there anymore, so on.
So you'll get warnings,
you'll get errors,
and you'll have to deal with those.
But our intent is that once you've
converted your source base to 64-bit,
that you can use the same source base to
generate both 32-bit and 64-bit versions
of your application or or framework,
and so on.
And that will just give
you one source space.
Now for Cocoa we have
this conversion script.
I demoed that earlier in another session,
but it's described pretty completely
in the Cocoa 64-bit transition guide.
And basically this conversion script
will take your Cocoa application
and do a fairly reasonable job of
converting it so it's 64-bit ready.
And you'll still have to do some
work on it to complete the job.
But anyway,
it'll get you part of the way there,
and maybe even 80-90% if you're lucky.
So, when you port, you know,
you're going to get compiler
warnings and errors.
So it's a good idea to build your project
warning-free before you do the port.
That way you know all the warnings
you're getting are due to 64-bit and not,
you know, oh, the warning was there,
and so on.
And sometimes, you know,
the warnings you fix in 32-bit end
up fixing real crashers in 64-bit.
So it's a good idea to
pay attention to those.
There's some additional flags to help
some catching some conversion problems.
For instance, shorten 64 to 32.
You can either use it
from the command line,
or there's a checkbox in Xcode for this.
This will tell you potentially
any place where you're truncating
a 64-bit prompt to the 32-bit.
Unfortunately,
this can be a little too noisy.
You'll get warnings where
you really didn't want to.
However,
it might still be a good idea to turn
it on at some phase during your port
and see what warnings you're getting,
because some might be interesting.
The W format flag will tell
you where you have the wrong
printf or sprintf arguments,
and it's also very useful.
This flag is actually on by default
if you're using W all or W most.
Now, beyond compiler warnings
and beyond compiler errors,
you might get runtime crashes when
you try to run your application.
That's actually good news,
because that means, you know,
you're still able to catch
your errors before you ship
your application to the users.
And, you know, then you work through
your runtime crashes.
And right now,
let me go through some of the pitfalls
that you might have to deal with.
So, the very first one is
the very common one.
It's, you know, pretty obvious.
I've already referred to it.
It's basically truncating pointers,
because the code made an assumption
that the size of a pointer is
equal to the size of an int.
So, the very first one is
the very common one.
It's, you know, pretty obvious.
I've already referred to it.
It's basically truncating pointers,
because the code made an assumption
that the size of a pointer is
equal to the size of an int.
You have code here, void star a pointer.
You assign that to an int,
and then you extract that later on.
So,
if you had the value 2 billion something,
or, you know, that's, you know,
a little bit more than that,
then you would have to do a lot of work.
So, that's 2 with 8 zeros following it,
which is clearly above 4 gigabytes.
After you're done, you know,
the top part of the pointer is gone.
So, clearly a bad idea.
To fix this,
you can use a type like int pointer t.
Int pointer t was
designed for this purpose,
to be the same size as a pointer,
an integer which is the
same size as a pointer.
You can also use other types like
long or any other 64-bit quantity,
depending on your use.
But anyway, something like this is the
way you fix this issue.
Another common mistake is
mismatch in formatting characters.
You know that %d refers to ints.
However,
it will work with longs in 32-bit.
But in 64-bit,
if you have a long and if you have %d,
that's not a good combination.
Because if you have a value like, say,
5 billion or whatever that
is - too many zeros - anyway,
so if you have a value
that's above 4 billion,
it will go ahead and
print a truncated value.
So, not a good idea.
In this case,
the fix is to simply use %ld.
Because %ld is what refers to a long,
and that is the right thing to use here.
And I believe Wformat will
catch errors like this.
Failing to use size of.
This is probably a pretty
elementary problem,
but there could be some reason
why you use the four there.
Maybe the memory you're
copying into is four.
But anyway, if you have a long and
you're copying it somewhere,
you really wanna use size of.
'Cause if you don't,
it will again truncate a part of
the data you're trying to copy,
and you will get different results
and different architectures.
So this is also a bad idea.
Now, this one's easy.
Just go ahead and use size of.
And in other cases, the fixes might vary.
But it's a common problem as well.
Mixing signed and unsigned arithmetic.
This is a common pitfall that even in
32-bit that sometimes becomes a problem.
This occurs because of C's rules for
how it deals with unsigned and signed.
When you mix the two,
the result is unsigned.
Now, typically,
when you mix the two and assign
the result to assigned value,
you don't feel the
effects of this problem.
But in this case, for instance,
where you have an int and
you have an unsigned int,
you add them together,
and then you assign to
assigned larger quantity the
signed extension is a problem.
Let me give you an example.
If you had a value-- here's what happens.
In this case, minus 2 plus 1 is supposed
to give you minus 1.
However,
because it's treated as unsigned,
it gives you 4.2 billion whatever.
And then when that's
assigned to the long,
it still retains that 4.2 billion,
which is clearly wrong.
Not what you wanted.
Now, there are many fixes to this.
The easiest one probably is
to make sure that unless you
really want an unsigned result,
cast your unsigns to signed values
when you're doing arithmetic.
That way the compiler
knows what you mean.
And this is one way to fix this.
There are other possible solutions.
Failing to specify the
appropriate type of constant.
So you're going to start seeing a lot of
decorations on your constants in 64-bit.
In this case we have an int and
we're trying to shift the number
1 by a certain number of bits.
Now if you happen to pass 30,
this works as expected.
If you happen to pass 31,
you get this garbage,
mainly because of the sign
extension to unsigned.
Because you're rolling - or
you're shifting a signed 1.
So you might think the fix
is to use a 1u over there,
which is of course an unsigned 1.
Now that gets you over the 31,
which now behaves correctly.
However, 32 doesn't work.
And the reason for that is
you have an int quantity,
and if you try to shift
an int more than 32,
it just becomes 0.
Because it's only 32 bits,
even though you're
assigning it to a long.
So really the fix here is
that you have a long int,
and you're not going to
be able to get a long int.
is to use 1UL.
And there you're specifying
that you want an unsigned 64-bit
quantity that you're going to shift,
and you might be
shifting it more than 32.
You're going to see these
kinds of decorations,
U's and UL's and so on,
a lot in your code as you move forward.
So constants are a good
thing to take a look at.
Now here's another one.
You might assume this code
is pretty straightforward:
if def ppc print
PowerPC else print Intel.
And on 64-bit PowerPC this prints Intel.
Because if def_ppc is
only true for 32-bit PPC.
There are a number of preprocessor
macros you should use.
The first four here: PPC, PPC64, i386,
x8664 - these are all
architecture specific.
These are a good idea
to use in some cases,
for instance if you have assembly code,
but they're really not what you
might want to use in other cases.
If you want to distinguish BigAndian,
for instance,
you would use FDefBigAndian.
If you want to distinguish 64-bit,
you would use this FLP64
that I showed earlier.
So again,
here's how you might handle BigNDN,
and here's how you would
handle 64-bit - #iflp64.
Now there is the pitfall
of wrong underlying type,
and that's something that impacted us,
and it might also hit you as well.
And the example is SN32,
which I showed earlier.
In Tiger,
SN32 is declared to be signed long.
Now SN32 is clearly a 32-bit quantity,
the name says so.
So if you were to go ask for the
size of SN32 in a 64-bit app,
you will get 8,
which is not what you want.
So, not a good idea.
So what we did to fix this is we
declared SN32 with two definitions.
In 64-bit it's defined as an int,
and in 32-bit it's defined as a long,
which gives you a 32-bit definition.
Now we did this because we want
to maintain binary compatibility.
If this sort of thing
happened in your code,
and you weren't part of a framework,
it's all in an app,
then you could just go ahead
and do the simple declaration,
which is just declared to be int32t.
You know,
this is really the straightforward thing.
This is what you really want to do here.
You have a type called 32-bit,
it's signed int.
Go ahead and declare it as
an underlying signed integer.
Okay, another pitfall is not upgrading
source code to new types.
As I said, we're not using CG floats
everywhere for Quartz.
And this actually, even if you don't
update your source code,
it will seem to work in many, many cases,
because a float will get upgraded to
a double when you call a function.
However, if you have something like this,
where you have an array of
four floats and you're trying
to create a color with them,
and CGColorCreate takes
an array of CG floats.
So if you call this on a 64-bit app,
you will get this result,
which is not what you expected.
Really, you need to be passing
in an array of CG floats.
Now this is interesting
to keep in mind because,
again,
this CG float conversion cases will work
most of the time except when pointers
to these quantities are involved.
So something to keep in mind.
And note that this pitfall could occur
with NSInteger and NSUInteger as well.
You know, writing data to files is always
tricky across architectures.
Using size-changing data types
across architectures is interesting.
Now with Intel,
you might have had to worry about
endianness of stuff you wrote to files.
With 64-bit you of course
have to worry about the size,
in addition to endianness.
Let's say you have a 32-bit process.
It writes a long out,
and it does it by just F-writing
the long using size of long.
That's fine, it writes out 4 bytes.
Now if the corresponding
process is run in 64-bit,
to read it,
it will clearly try to read 8 bytes.
So while you really meant
to write out 20,000 hexes,
it will read back 20,000
followed by garbage,
and might even crash or give you
some other unexpected result.
And again,
the problem is size of long is 8 bytes.
There are multiple fixes here.
One possible one is be very
explicit about what you're writing.
Use int32t and write out just 4
bytes in both input and output.
This is pretty straightforward.
This sort of pitfall exists for
the old archiver in Cocoa as well.
Let's say you have an instance variable,
and let's say it used to be an int.
And let's say you ran the
conversion script we told you about.
The conversion script will
convert your int to an NSInteger,
and you might think that's a good idea,
because that seems fine.
And that's the way you want to leave it,
which is good.
However, if you're using the
old non-keyed archiver,
you need to look at the code now.
The code might have looked like this:
you're writing out your instance
variable using the type i,
which clearly refers to a 32-bit element.
And here is the reader
that corresponds to this.
Clearly if the reader is
in a 64-bit application,
there is now an inconsistency between
the read and the written value.
So this also is a bad idea.
So let me show you how
you might fix this.
Assuming you don't want to
change your file format,
because you want to keep your file format
the same between 32-bit and 64-bit,
this is one way you could approach this.
And this also is complete
with error handling here.
If the instance variable's
value is less than int max,
assign it to a temporary integer,
and write it out using the
code you were using before.
Now if the value is greater than int max,
clearly you have a value that can
no longer be written to that file,
and it's something you might
want to warn the user about.
You might need to
upgrade your file format,
but that's left as an exercise to you.
And then the reader is - you
do the similar kind of change.
You read the value into a temp,
which is an integer,
and then you assign it to
your instance variable.
And the reason we have to
use that temporary integer is
because we're reading the value
via a pointer by the address.
So we really need to provide
the correct size there.
Now the good news is this is only a
problem with the old archiver in Cocoa.
And we've actually introduced
a new archiver back in 10.2,
and we've been encouraging
you to move over to it.
So hopefully this is only a problem
for a very small number of cases.
One case is clearly if you
have old document formats
that you're still sporting,
this is something to keep
in mind if you do that.
Now here's unexpected API behaviors.
Let's say you want to write a function
that returns a random number from 0 to 1.
And you saw in standard lib.h
that random returns a long.
So you went ahead and
wrote this function.
It gets the value of random,
divides it by long_max,
and gets you a value between 0 and 1.
Now if you were to run this
on a 64-bit application,
you will get these tiny little
values most of the time.
And people playing your poker application
or whatnot will either be delighted
that they're winning all the time,
or they'll be sad that they'll
be losing all the time.
But it's not going to seem very random.
And the reason for that is because if
you read the documentation for random,
it says that random returns
values from 0 to 2^31 - 1.
So although the header says one thing,
the documentation clarifies
it a little further.
So that's the way random
is documented to behave.
And this is one of these cases where
you can trust the documentation.
So...
This is one possible fix.
Since you know that it returns
2^ , you go divide that by value,
so this will give you
quantities from 0 to 1.
Now this is in a category of pitfalls
that deserves a special mention.
There are some other
API changes across the system.
Now this random one
was not an API change,
but there are some other things
to watch out in APIs you're using.
And one of them is these
API changes where we're making
our APIs more POSIX compliant.
Functions like mmap, putenv, open,
select, and a few more now have
different behaviors when run
in POSIX compliance mode.
And by default, these changes apply to
10.5 only applications.
So existing 32-bit
applications are unaffected,
but they are enabled
for 64-bit applications.
So when you run your 64-bit
application and when you debug it,
you need to pay attention to how
you're using these functions.
The documentation goes through
detail as to what the changes are,
so it's something you really
need to pay attention to.
And some of the changes are subtle,
and you have to pass the
right options and so on.
Now speaking of these API changes,
there's of course another category
of API changes to be aware of,
and these are APIs not
available in 64-bit.
Simon mentioned these yesterday.
I'm not going to go through
it in any detail today,
but these are some of the
APIs that are not available.
And these are some of the cars.
And I really love that the CFM there.
But these are some of the APIs that
are not available to you in 64-bit.
Now for tomorrow's in-depth talk,
which is tomorrow morning at 9:00
a.m., Matthew Formica will actually
go through these APIs and go through
what the replacements are in detail.
So be sure to come for that.
Okay, so with that let's go to our
closing thoughts on 64-bit.
Now one thing that's important
as you move to 64-bit is this
notion of interoperability.
You really want the file
formats used between 32-bit
and 64-bit to be compatible.
For instance,
Nib files that Interface Builder
generates will work either in 32-bit apps
or 64-bit apps with no changes needed.
This is true for preference files,
all other data files your app writes,
and also documents as well.
Unless there is a reason that
your document needs to start
holding 64-bit quantities,
so you need to upgrade
your document format,
be sure that the document
formats are interchangeable.
The user should not care which
version of the app wrote the document.
So in this way,
the interoperability stakes
are similar to 32-bit Intel.
Just like users don't know whether
they're using 32-bit Intel or
PowerPC version of the app,
the same holds true for 64-bit
versions of the applications.
Now another consideration is performance.
Now we already talked about whether you
should move applications 64-bit or not.
And the general recommendation is
there's absolutely no benefit to move it,
no performance benefit.
You probably don't need to move it.
You know,
it's not going to get you any benefit.
Why do it?
Now however, even in cases where it seems
like there might be no benefit,
let me give you an example.
Earlier in another session
I showed how to convert the
TextEdit application to 64-bit.
And you would think
TextEdit is a fairly small,
harmless application, and it is harmless,
but when run under 64-bit it
actually becomes capable of opening
documents larger than 4 gigabytes.
That's one hidden benefit.
Is it a good enough benefit?
Probably not.
In fact,
we're not going to ship TextEdit as
a 64-bit application on the system,
but you know,
it is something to keep in mind.
Now there is one other
performance consideration.
If you are moving to 64-bit
and you're using 64-bit because
of the large memory access,
you need to keep in mind,
you need to check the physical
memory in the machine and adjust
your algorithms accordingly.
Earlier I said,
just because a user has a 64-bit machine,
it does not mean they have 8 or 16
gigabytes of memory in their machine.
In fact, if you're in that
DNA demo we saw yesterday,
if you ran the 64-bit version of that
on an iMac G5 with 512 megs of memory,
it would just bog down terribly
because it assumes it's got at
least 4 gigabytes of memory.
So when you write large memory algorithms
where you take advantage of large memory,
one thing you should do is you should
check the memory in the machine and if,
you know, enough memory isn't available,
either fall back to 32-bit algorithms or
maybe your application isn't able to run.
And here is one way you could do that.
You use the syscadl or syscadl
by name with the mem size and
it returns to you the amount of
physical memory in the machine.
Fairly straightforward.
And this is one way
you can check for this.
And porting stakes,
again as I said earlier,
it's totally our intent to use the
same source base for 32-bit and
64-bit versions of your binary.
This means less sources, less divergence,
and less opportunity for problems.
Now if you do need to conditionalize
parts of your source code,
and you might need to,
use #if LP64 to distinguish those cases.
And opportunities in
the 64-bit transition.
You already saw one of the
opportunities that we took,
and that was to introduce CGFloat
and make our graphics subsystem
capable of more accuracy,
more range, wider range.
64-bit is really an opportunity
to remove deprecated APIs,
to remove compatibility
hacks and old subsystems.
It's really an opportunity
for us to modernize the
OS by removing all the stuff,
and for you to modernize your apps
by also doing things brand new ways,
taking advantage of the six-word
address space and moving to new APIs and
getting rid of the old APIs that
might be holding your application back.
Now we will talk about this in
the in-depth talk a great deal,
so please come tomorrow.
Now for more coverage for 64-bit,
for the API changes,
for unavailable APIs, for replacements,
state of 64-bit in Leopard Preview,
because not everything is quite perfect,
we have to admit that.
And also, a good amount of information
on architectural details,
especially Intel 64, which is a brand new
environment to many of us.
Please come to the in-depth talk
tomorrow morning at 9:00 AM,
and I believe it's in the
big hall in the Presidio.
We have a bunch of documentation.
This documentation is not on your DVD,
so you have to download
it from the WWDC site.
We have a 64-bit transition guide,
which is an upgraded version
of the Tiger document.
And we have transition
guides for both Carbon,
and Cocoa.
And these cover the topics
I touched upon and a bunch more.
And the 64-bit Cocoa one, as I mentioned,
goes through the conversion
process step by step.
So if you're going to be doing that,
it's a good thing to read through.
We also have three 64-bit labs
starting tomorrow afternoon,
and Thursday morning, and Friday morning.
And there will be many
engineers from Appleto's,
and there will also be
64-bit capable machines.
So please come with your
projects if you're interested
in converting to 64-bit,
and we can try to answer some questions.